JEP-7 - Add Python Runtime to the scope, document the rollout plan (#356)
jenkinsci/jep: jep/7/README.adoc

== Abstract

Due to its negative impact on core maintenance, distribution of the unmaintained
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/ruby-runtime-plugin[Ruby Runtime plugin] and

> link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins.py[Jenkins Python SDK] will be suspended.

Reviewer: There is no technical reason for us to suspend `python-wrapper`. No workarounds or hacks support it. So let's not pretend there is a technical reason for doing that.

Author: I believe there is a consensus in the dev list we want to deprecate it as is while we are there. Do you disagree with that and suggest reverting the Python wrapper change entirely? Or is it just a wording concern?

Reviewer: The point is that it is simply untrue that we deprecate it _due to its negative impact on core maintenance_.

Distribution of plugins depending on them will be suspended until their dependency is removed.

== Specification

Ruby runtime and Python SDK will be added to the `artifact-ignores` file of the update center generator, so it is no longer available for download on update sites.
A warning will be added to the update center so that all users of the plugins receive a warning in advance.

> The plugins will be also marked for adoption so that users can step up and take over maintenance without a 2 weeks waiting delay.

Reviewer 2: is this something that we even want?  
how does it impact the CI system, the automatic secure releases (JEP-i-forget-the-number)?

I think this is mixing up the plugins that depend on the runtimes and the actual runtim plugins themselves?

Author: So the idea is to let contributors to quickly takeover the plugins and to migrate them to the supported runtimes.
No plan to recover the existing runtimes unless there is a strong commitment to maintain them by a large contributor

Reviewer 2: so then I think this is unclear as written as "The plugins will be marked for adoption" includes the runtime ones.

```suggestion
Plugins depending on the either the Ruby runtime or the Python SDK will be also marked for adoption so that users can step up and take over maintenance without a 2 weeks waiting delay.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Plugins depending on the either the Ruby runtime or the Python SDK will be also marked for adoption so that users can step up and take over maintenance (by switching to the regular Java runtime) without a 2 weeks waiting delay.
```

Plugins with a mandatory dependency on the runtimes will be added to the same file, as they will not be installable without the respective runtimes being available.
The multiple Git repositories holding the `ruby-runtime` and Python SDK source code will be archived on GitHub.

> Support for Ruby Runtime in the Jenkins core will be removed in future Jenkins versions.

Reviewer 2: does this not conflict with https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/356/files#diff-79416440f404d2b50d67e437cd226b4e742c20f94cce5a10f23be10d063d65adR80 ?

Author: I do not see a  conflict. Update site and the Jenkins core are separate components

Reviewer 2: I see it conflicting as does `ruby-runtime` plugin which would be up for adoption based on line 82 above actually requires this support in core to work?  (maybe I am missing something, or my suggestion above clarifies this)

Reviewer: Agree with James, let's not pretend it can come back once we've ripped out support.

> Support for Ruby Runtime in the Jenkins core will be removed in future Jenkins versions.

Reviewer: This line is committing core development as part of this JEP. Is this intentional? Who's going to do that?

This is very different from saying we may remove it, or something similarly less committing.

Author: ```suggestion
Support for Ruby Runtime in the Jenkins core may be removed in future Jenkins versions.
```

I think we agreed to do it in the dev list, but happy to change it to a less-commitment statement. Happy to take the action item though

This includes but not limited to:

* link:https://github.com/stapler/stapler/tree/master/jruby[Stapler JRuby library] bundled in the Jenkins core
* Permit lists for link:/jep/200[JEP-200: Switch Remoting/XStream denylist to a permitlist]
* XStream converters for JRuby components

No future core development will consider the impact on Ruby/Python runtimes and plugins based on them.
Bug reports to core and related components about their impact on `ruby-runtime` and plugins based on it will be closed as *Won't Fix*.

=== Rollout plan

At least 1 month before removal::

> * Announcement blogpost on jenkins.io with the user-focused overview of the change and the delcivery plan

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Announcement blogpost on jenkins.io with the user-focused overview of the change and the delivery plan
```

* Plugins are marked for adoption
* Plugins will be deprecated in the Update site immediately after the announcement.
  The deprecation notice will reference the announcement blogpost as justification.
* Plugin users will have 1 month to bring up their concerns, if any.

>   They will have an option to step up and contribute to the plugins so that they are migrated to the standard Jenkins plugin runtime.

Reviewer 3: I do not see any particular reason for even the one-month delay—you can use the plugins as they are, on existing core versions, until they are rewritten to Java—but OK.

Author: Time for the plugin management flows like CasC to adjust

Reviewer 3: If you are generating a Docker image or whatever from scratch using downloads. Yes I suppose so.

Author: The blogpost draft describes it in more details, with many use-cases mentioned

Reviewer 4: > If you are generating a Docker image or whatever from scratch using downloads. Yes I suppose so.
lots of people do this with the helm chart, and then the k8s image fails to startup, and we get blamed.

Removal date::

* Plugins are removed from official Jenkins update centers.
  Users of both weekly and LTS release baselines will no longer be able to install or update the plugins.
* Maybe: Additional announcement is published on jenkins.io to advice deletion of the plugins

> * If there are any unbpublished security issues related to the depublished plugins,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If there are any unpublished security issues related to the depublished plugins,
```

  a security advisory is released for them shortly after depublishing.
* Ruby and Python plugin runtime codebases are archived on GitHub.

After the removal::

> A pull request is submitted to the Jenkins, with a cleanup of the code and functionality slated for deletion.

Reviewer: As above, this seems like a lot compare to "we stop caring and may clean this up at some point".

Author: ```suggestion
A pull request may be submitted to the Jenkins core at some point, with a cleanup of the code and functionality slated for deletion.
```

Stapler JRuby library might be also deleted from the Stapler codebase.
This is a breaking change.
Once the pull request is merged, the next weekly release will no longer be able to run the Ruby/Python runtime based plugins properly,
with undefined behavior and likely Jenkins startup failure as a result.
This needs to be explicitly referenced in the changelog.

Jenkins LTS users will be able to continue using the deprecated/depublished plugins until a new LTS baseline picks up the change.
ETA for it - the September 2021 LTS release.
After this release new Jenkins LTS versions will not be able to run the plugins as well.
This change will be documented in the LTS upgrade guidelines.

Plugins may be restored in the update centers once

> there are contributors who take ownership of a plugin and migrate it to the new runtime.

Reviewer 2: "the new runtime"  what is the "new" runtime here?  is this just migrate it to the standard Java runtime?

Author: Yes, standard Java one. Will reword

Author: ```suggestion
there are contributors who take ownership of a plugin and migrate it to the standard Java plugin runtime.
```

== Abstract

Due to its negative impact on core maintenance, distribution of the unmaintained
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/ruby-runtime-plugin[Ruby Runtime plugin] and
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins.py[Jenkins Python SDK] will be suspended.
Distribution of plugins depending on them will be suspended until their dependency is removed.

== Specification

> Ruby runtime and Python SDK will be added to the `artifact-ignores` file of the update center generator, so it is no longer available for download on update sites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ruby runtime and Python SDK will be added to the `artifact-ignores` file of the update center generator, so they are no longer available for download on update sites.
```

A warning will be added to the update center so that all users of the plugins receive a warning in advance.
Plugins depending on the either the Ruby runtime or the Python SDK will be also marked for adoption so that users can step up and take over maintenance (by switching to the regular Java runtime) without a 2 weeks waiting delay.

> Plugins with a mandatory dependency on the runtimes will be added to the same file, as they will not be installable without the respective runtimes being available.

Reviewer: What file? We're in the next paragraph, several sentences later.

It is unmaintained and the changelog mentions a version 0.13 that has never actually been released.

> Over the past year, multiple changes to core negatively impacted ruby-runtime based plugins, and core maintainers had to implement workarounds to address these problems.

Reviewer: Given this JEP is a few years old, phrases like _the past year_ need updating.

Author: ```suggestion
Over the past years, multiple changes to core negatively impacted ruby-runtime based plugins, and core maintainers had to implement workarounds to address these problems.
```

Will review the whole doc later, just a minor bump

Therefore this JEP proposed the deprecation of ruby-runtime, and to suspend its distribution via Jenkins project update sites.

> The same reasoning applies to the Jenkins Python SDK.

Reviewer: Please reference a single change, hack, or workaround we had to do to make `python-wrapper` work.

Author: ```suggestion
The same concerns apply to the Jenkins Python SDK.
Although we have not experienced issues with that due to the low adoption, potentially it may lead to the core maintenance overhead.
Low adoption and lack of interest in Jenkins plugin development for Python suggests that we can just remove the support as a part of this JEP.
```

Would it work?

If previous core compatibility fixes are reverted, or future core changes break ruby-runtime, users of those plugins will be impacted.

=== Affected plugins, Ruby runtime

Below you can find a list of the affected plugins which are/were being hosted in the main Jenkins update center.
There might be other 3rd-party plugins affected.

Gitlab Hook::
Last released **5 years ago**. +
Contains multiple security vulnerabilties. +

> Suggestion: Use the plugin:gitlab-plugin[GitLab] plugin and the plugin:gitlab-branch-source[GitLab Branch Source] plugin.

Reviewer: All of these suggestions have no reason to be here.

Author: Why not? It may help someone reading the doc

Reviewer: It's a specification, not a user guide. Different documents for different audiences.

> Suggestion: Use the plugin:gitlab-plugin[GitLab] plugin and the plugin:gitlab-branch-source[GitLab Branch Source] plugin.

Author: ```suggestion
Suggestion: Use the https://github.com/jenkinsci/gitlab-plugin[GitLab] plugin or the https://github.com/jenkinsci/gitlab-branch-source-plugin[GitLab Branch Source] plugin.
```

Cucumber::
Last released **8 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `cucumber` from the command line.

pyenv::
Last released **7 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `pyenv` from the command line.

Rvm::
Last released **5 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `rvm` from the command line.

Capitomcat::
Last released **6 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Install Ruby and Capistrano and use `sh` or `bat` to invoke them from the command line.

Commit Message Trigger::
Last released **7 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to read git commit messages and conditionally execute Pipeline steps.

Git notes::
Last released **9 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to run `git` to annotate commits.

rbenv::
Last released **5 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `rbenv` from the command line.

Chef::
Last released **6 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `chef` from the command line.

CI Skip::
Last released **7 years ago**. +

> Suggestion: Use the plugin:github-scm-trait-commit-skip[GitHub Commit Skip SCM Behaviour], plugin:bitbucket-scm-trait-commit-skip[Bitbucket Commit Skip SCM Behaviour], or plugin:scmskip[SCM Skip] to skip builds based on the content of commit messages.

Reviewer: Bad copy and paste doesn't work outside jenkins.io

Author: Ack, will fix in a follow-up

Author: ```suggestion
Suggestion: Use the https://github.com/jenkinsci/github-scm-trait-commit-skip-plugin[GitHub Commit Skip SCM Behaviour], https://github.com/jenkinsci/bitbucket-scm-trait-commit-skip-plugin[Bitbucket Commit Skip SCM Behaviour], or https://github.com/jenkinsci/scmskip-plugin[SCM Skip] to skip builds based on the content of commit messages.
```

Alternately, use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to read git commit messages and conditionally execute Pipeline steps.

MySQL Job Databases::
Last released **7 years ago**. +

> Suggestion: Use link:https://github.com/jbox-web/job-database-manager-mysql[Jenkins Job Database Manager Plugin for MySQL].

Reviewer: Same

Pathignore::
Last released **9 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use the path ignore features of various plugins or use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to read git commit messages and conditionally execute Pipeline steps.

Perl::
Last released **8 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `perl` from the command line.

pry::
Last released **9 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use the Jenkins groovy console and its interface from the Jenkins command line interface.

Single Use Slave::
Last released **6 years ago**. +

> Suggestion: Use cloud agents (plugin:amazon-ecs[Fargate], plugin:azure-container-agents[Azure Container Instances], plugin:docker-workflow/[Docker], etc.) to allocate agents for a single use and then release them.

Reviewer: same

Author: ```suggestion
Suggestion: Use cloud agents (https://github.com/jenkinsci/amazon-ecs-plugin[Fargate], https://github.com/jenkinsci/azure-container-agents-plugin[Azure Container Instances], https://github.com/jenkinsci/docker-workflow-plugin[Docker], etc.) to allocate agents for a single use and then release them.
```

Travis YML::
Last released **4 years ago**. +

> Suggestion: Rewrite the travis.yml file as a Jenkinsfile, a link:/blog/2019/05/09/templating-engine/[Jenkins Templating Engine file], a plugin:pipeline-as-yaml[Pipeline as YAML], or a link:/blog/2019/01/08/mpl-modular-pipeline-library/[Jenkins Modular Pipeline Library].

Author: ```suggestion
Suggestion: Rewrite the travis.yml file as a Jenkinsfile, a link:https://jenkins.io/blog/2019/05/09/templating-engine/[Jenkins Templating Engine file], a https://github.com/jenkinsci/pipeline-as-yam-pluginl[Pipeline as YAML], or a link:https://jenkins.io/blog/2019/01/08/mpl-modular-pipeline-library/[Jenkins Modular Pipeline Library].
```

Rvm::
Last released **5 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `rvm` from the command line.

Capitomcat::
Last released **6 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Install Ruby and Capistrano and use `sh` or `bat` to invoke them from the command line.

Commit Message Trigger::
Last released **7 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to read git commit messages and conditionally execute Pipeline steps.

Git notes::
Last released **9 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to run `git` to annotate commits.

rbenv::
Last released **5 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `rbenv` from the command line.

Chef::
Last released **6 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `chef` from the command line.

CI Skip::
Last released **7 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use the plugin:github-scm-trait-commit-skip[GitHub Commit Skip SCM Behaviour], plugin:bitbucket-scm-trait-commit-skip[Bitbucket Commit Skip SCM Behaviour], or plugin:scmskip[SCM Skip] to skip builds based on the content of commit messages.
Alternately, use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to read git commit messages and conditionally execute Pipeline steps.

> 
> InstallShield::
> Last released **7 years ago**. +
> Suggestion: Use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to run InstallShield.

Author: ```suggestion

InstallShield::
Last released **7 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to run InstallShield.
```

pry::
Last released **9 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use the Jenkins groovy console and its interface from the Jenkins command line interface.

Single Use Slave::
Last released **6 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use cloud agents (plugin:amazon-ecs[Fargate], plugin:azure-container-agents[Azure Container Instances], plugin:docker-workflow/[Docker], etc.) to allocate agents for a single use and then release them.

Travis YML::
Last released **4 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Rewrite the travis.yml file as a Jenkinsfile, a link:/blog/2019/05/09/templating-engine/[Jenkins Templating Engine file], a plugin:pipeline-as-yaml[Pipeline as YAML], or a link:/blog/2019/01/08/mpl-modular-pipeline-library/[Jenkins Modular Pipeline Library].

Yammer::
Last released **8 years ago**. +
Suggestion: Use the link:https://developer.yammer.com/docs/rest-api-rate-limits[Yammer REST API] to post messages.

DevStack::
Last released **9 years ago**.

Ikachan::
Last released **9 years ago**.

Jenkinspider::
Last released **6 years ago**.

Perl Smoke Test::
Last released **7 years ago**.

buddycloud::
Last released **7 years ago**.

=== Affected plugins, Python runtime

> InstallShield::

Reviewer 2: is this correct - it uses both python and ruby runtime?  
https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/pull/356/files#diff-79416440f404d2b50d67e437cd226b4e742c20f94cce5a10f23be10d063d65adR233

Author: Nope, only Python. Copied it from the blogpost from @halkeye , will update the JEP text

== References

* https://groups.google.com/d/msg/jenkinsci-dev/Ve0fqAud3Mk/MTIxw6ZyBwAJ
* https://github.com/jenkinsci/ruby-runtime-plugin[Ruby Runtime Plugin]
* https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/pull/4256[Announcement Draft]
* https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/pull/4256[Announcement blogpost]

== Change history

> * April 2021 - Extend the scope to include the Python plugin runtime,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* December 2021 - Extend the scope to include the Python plugin runtime,
```

== References

* https://groups.google.com/d/msg/jenkinsci-dev/Ve0fqAud3Mk/MTIxw6ZyBwAJ
* https://github.com/jenkinsci/ruby-runtime-plugin[Ruby Runtime Plugin]
* https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/pull/4256[Announcement Draft]
* https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/pull/4256[Announcement blogpost]

> 
> == Change history
> 
> * April 2021 - Extend the scope to include the Python plugin runtime,
>   clarify the scope and the rollout plan based on the dev list discussion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Git history is here for anyone who cares.

Author: It is easier to keep it like that for major changes

Reviewer: Given the notable scope extension, at least a quick note is appropriate IMO.
